Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

Most people infected with the virus will experience mild to moderate respiratory illness and recover without requiring special treatment. However, some will become seriously ill and require medical attention. Older people and those with underlying medical conditions like cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, or cancer are more likely to develop serious illness. Anyone can get sick with COVID-19 and become seriously ill or die at any age. 

The best way to prevent and slow down transmission is to be well informed about the disease and how the virus spreads. Protect yourself and others from infection by staying at least 1 metre apart from others, wearing a properly fitted mask, and washing your hands or using an alcohol-based rub frequently. Get vaccinated when it’s your turn and follow local guidance.

The virus can spread from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles when they cough, sneeze, speak, sing or breathe. These particles range from larger respiratory droplets to smaller aerosols. It is important to practice respiratory etiquette, for example by coughing into a flexed elbow, and to stay home and self-isolate until you recover if you feel unwell.
To prevent infection and to slow transmission of COVID-19, do the following: 

Get vaccinated when a vaccine is available to you.
Stay at least 1 metre apart from others, even if they don’t appear to be sick.
Wear a properly fitted mask when physical distancing is not possible or when in poorly ventilated settings.
Choose open, well-ventilated spaces over closed ones. Open a window if indoors.
Wash your hands regularly with soap and water or clean them with alcohol-based hand rub.
Cover your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing.
If you feel unwell, stay home and self-isolate until you recover.

COVID-19 affects different people in different ways. Most infected people will develop mild to moderate illness and recover without hospitalization.

Most common symptoms:

fever
cough
tiredness
loss of taste or smell.
Less common symptoms:

sore throat
headache
aches and pains
diarrhoea
a rash on skin, or discolouration of fingers or toes
red or irritated eyes.

Serious symptoms:

difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
loss of speech or mobility, or confusion
chest pain.
Seek immediate medical attention if you have serious symptoms.  Always call before visiting your doctor or health facility. 

People with mild symptoms who are otherwise healthy should manage their symptoms at home. 

On average it takes 5–6 days from when someone is infected with the virus for symptoms to show, however it can take up to 14 days

Keep yourself and others safe: Do it all!
Protect yourself and those around you:

Get vaccinated as soon as it’s your turn and follow local guidance on vaccination.
Keep physical distance of at least 1 metre from others, even if they don’t appear to be sick. Avoid crowds and close contact.
Wear a properly fitted mask when physical distancing is not possible and in poorly ventilated settings.
Clean your hands frequently with alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water.
Cover your mouth and nose with a bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze. Dispose of used tissues immediately and clean hands regularly. 
If you develop symptoms or test positive for COVID-19, self-isolate until you recover.

 

Wear a mask properly
To properly wear your mask:

Make sure your mask covers your nose, mouth and chin.
Clean your hands before you put your mask on, before and after you take it off, and after you touch it at any time.
When you take off your mask, store it in a clean plastic bag, and every day either wash it if it’s a fabric mask or dispose of it in a trash bin if it’s a medical mask.
Don’t use masks with valves.


More about masks:

When and how to wear masks
Questions and answers about children and masks
Guidance for decision makers and health workers
 

Make your environment safer
The risks of getting COVID-19 are higher in crowded and inadequately ventilated spaces where infected people spend long periods of time together in close proximity.

Outbreaks have been reported in places where people have gather, often in crowded indoor settings and where they talk loudly, shout, breathe heavily or sing such as restaurants, choir practices, fitness classes, nightclubs, offices and places of worship.

To make your environment as safe as possible:

Avoid the 3Cs: spaces that are closed, crowded or involve close contact.
Meet people outside. Outdoor gatherings are safer than indoor ones, particularly if indoor spaces are small and without outdoor air coming in.
If you can’t avoid crowded or indoor settings, take these precautions:
Open a window to increase the amount of natural ventilation when indoors.
Wear a mask (see above for more details).

More on:

Small public gatherings
Ventilation and air conditioning (for the general public)
Ventilation and air conditioning (for people who manage public spaces and buildings) 
 

Keep good hygiene
By following good respiratory hygiene you protect the people around you from viruses that cause colds, flu and COVID-19. 

To ensure good hygiene you should:

Regularly and thoroughly clean your hands with either an alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water. This eliminates germs that may be on your hands, including viruses.
Cover your mouth and nose with your bent elbow or a tissue when you cough or sneeze. Dispose of the used tissue immediately into a closed bin and wash your hands.
Clean and disinfect surfaces frequently, especially those which are regularly touched, such as door handles, faucets and phone screens.
 

What to do if you feel unwell
If you feel unwell, here’s what to do. 

If you have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, seek medical attention immediately. Call by telephone first and follow the directions of your local health authority.
Know the full range of symptoms of COVID-19. The most common symptoms of COVID-19 are fever, dry cough, tiredness and loss of taste or smell. Less common symptoms include aches and pains, headache, sore throat, red or irritated eyes, diarrhoea,  a skin rash or discolouration of fingers or toes.
Stay home and self-isolate for 10 days from symptom onset, plus three days after symptoms cease. Call your health care provider or hotline for advice. Have someone bring you supplies. If you need to leave your house or have someone near you, wear a properly fitted mask to avoid infecting others.
Keep up to date on the latest information from trusted sources, such as WHO or your local and national health authorities. Local and national authorities and public health units are best placed to advise on what people in your area should be doing to protect themselves.

Key facts
Campylobacter is 1 of 4 key global causes of diarrhoeal diseases. It is considered to be the most common bacterial cause of human gastroenteritis in the world.
Campylobacter infections are generally mild, but can be fatal among very young children, elderly, and immunosuppressed individuals.
Campylobacter species can be killed by heat and thoroughly cooking food.
To prevent Campylobacter infections, make sure to follow basic food hygiene practices when preparing food.
The burden of foodborne diseases, including Campylobacteriosis, is substantial: every year almost 1 in 10 people fall ill and 33 million of healthy life years are lost. Foodborne diseases can be severe, especially for young children. Diarrhoeal diseases are the most common illnesses resulting from unsafe food, with 550 million people falling ill yearly (including 220 million children under the age of 5 years). Campylobacter is 1 of the 4 key global causes of diarrhoeal diseases.
The high incidence of Campylobacter diarrhoea, as well as its duration and possible complications, makes it highly important from a socio-economic perspective. In developing countries, Campylobacter infections in children under the age of 2 years are especially frequent, sometimes resulting in death.

Campylobacter are mainly spiral-shaped, “S”-shaped, or curved, rod-shaped bacteria. Currently, there are 17 species and 6 subspecies assigned to the genus Campylobacter, of which the most frequently reported in human diseases are C. jejuni (subspecies jejuni) and C. coli. Other species such as C. lari and C. upsaliensis have also been isolated from patients with diarrhoeal disease, but are reported less frequently.

The disease
Campylobacteriosis is the disease caused by the infection with Campylobacter:

The onset of disease symptoms usually occurs 2 to 5 days after infection with the bacteria, but can range from 1 to 10 days.
The most common clinical symptoms of Campylobacter infections include diarrhoea (frequently bloody), abdominal pain, fever, headache, nausea, and/or vomiting. The symptoms typically last 3 to 6 days.
Death from campylobacteriosis is rare and is usually confined to very young children or elderly patients, or to those already suffering from another serious disease such as AIDS.
Complications such as bacteraemia (presence of bacteria in the blood), hepatitis, pancreatitis (infections of liver and pancreas, respectively), and miscarriage have been reported with various degrees of frequency. Post-infection complications may include reactive arthritis (painful inflammation of the joints which can last for several months) and neurological disorders such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, a polio-like form of paralysis that can result in respiratory and severe neurological dysfunction in a small number of cases.
Sources and transmission
Campylobacter species are widely distributed in most warm-blooded animals. They are prevalent in food animals such as poultry, cattle, pigs, sheep and ostriches; and in pets, including cats and dogs. The bacteria have also been found in shellfish.

The main route of transmission is generally believed to be foodborne, via undercooked meat and meat products, as well as raw or contaminated milk. Contaminated water or ice is also a source of infection. A proportion of cases occur following contact with contaminated water during recreational activities.

Campylobacteriosis is a zoonosis, a disease transmitted to humans from animals or animal products. Most often, carcasses or meat are contaminated by Campylobacter from faeces during slaughtering. In animals, Campylobacter seldom causes disease.

The relative contribution of each of the above sources to the overall burden of disease is unclear but consumption of undercooked contaminated poultry is believed to be a major contributor. Since common-source outbreaks account for a rather small proportion of cases, the vast majority of reports refer to sporadic cases, with no easily discernible pattern.

Estimating the importance of all known sources is therefore extremely difficult. In addition, the wide occurrence of Campylobacter also hinders the development of control strategies throughout the food chain. However, in countries where specific strategies have been put in place to reduce the prevalence of Campylobacter in live poultry, a similar reduction in human cases is observed.

Treatment
Treatment is not generally required, except electrolyte replacement and rehydration. Antimicrobial treatment is recommended in invasive cases (when bacteria invade the intestinal mucosa cells and damage the tissues) or to eliminate the carrier state (the condition of people who harbour Campylobacter in their bodies and keep shedding the bacteria while remaining asymptomatic).

Prevention methods
There are a number of strategies that can be used to prevent disease from Campylobacter:

Prevention is based on control measures at all stages of the food chain, from agricultural production on a farm, to processing, manufacturing and preparation of foods both commercially and domestically.
In countries without adequate sewage disposal systems, faeces and articles soiled with faeces may need to be disinfected before disposal.
Measures to reduce the prevalence of Campylobacter in poultry include enhanced biosecurity to avoid transmission of Campylobacter from the environment to the flock of birds on the farm. This control option is feasible only where birds are kept in closed housing conditions.
Good hygienic slaughtering practices reduce the contamination of carcasses by faeces, but will not guarantee the absence of Campylobacter from meat and meat products. Training in hygienic food handling for abattoir workers and raw meat producers is essential to keep contamination to a minimum.
Prevention methods against infection in domestic kitchens are similar to those used against other foodborne bacterial diseases.
Bactericidal treatment, such as heating (for example, cooking or pasteurization) or irradiation, is the only effective method of eliminating Campylobacter from contaminated foods.
WHO response
In partnership with other stakeholders, WHO is strongly advocating the importance of food safety as an essential element in ensuring access to safe and nutritious diets. WHO is providing policies and recommendations that cover the entire food chain from production to consumption, making use of different types of expertise across different sectors.

WHO is working towards the strengthening of food safety systems in an increasingly globalized world. Setting international food safety standards, enhancing disease surveillance, educating consumers and training food handlers in safe food handling are amongst the most critical interventions in the prevention of foodborne illnesses.

In collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the WHO Collaborating Centre at the University of Utrecht, WHO published the report The global view of campylobacteriosis in 2012.

The global view of campylobacteriosis
WHO is strengthening the capacities of national and regional laboratories in the surveillance of foodborne pathogens, such as Campylobacter and Salmonella.

WHO is also promoting the integrated surveillance of antimicrobial resistance of pathogens in the food chain, collecting samples from humans, food and animals and analysing data across the sectors.

WHO Advisory Group on Integrated Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance (AGISAR)
WHO, jointly with FAO, is assisting Member States by coordinating international efforts for early detection and response to foodborne disease outbreaks through the network of national authorities in Member States.

International Network of Food Safety Authorities (INFOSAN)
WHO also provides scientific assessments as basis for international food standards, guidelines and recommendations developed by the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission to prevent foodborne diseases.

Codex Alimentarius Commission
Recommendations for the public and travellers
The following guidance will help people to stay safe while travelling:

Ensure food is properly cooked and still hot when served.
Avoid raw milk and products made from raw milk. Drink only pasteurized or boiled milk.
Avoid ice unless it is made from safe water.
When the safety of drinking water is questionable, boil it, or if this is not possible, disinfect it with a reliable, slow-release disinfectant agent (usually available at pharmacies).
Wash hands thoroughly and frequently using soap, in particular after contact with pets or farm animals, or after having been to the toilet.
Wash fruits and vegetables carefully, particularly if they are eaten raw. If possible, vegetables and fruits should be peeled.
A guide on safe food for travellers
Recommendations for food handlers
WHO provides the following guidance for people handling food:

Both professional and domestic food handlers should be vigilant while preparing food and should observe hygienic rules of food preparation.
Professional food handlers who suffer from fever, diarrhoea, vomiting, or visible infected skin lesions should report to their employer immediately.
The WHO Five keys to safer food serve as the basis for educational programmes to train food handlers and educate consumers. They are especially important in preventing food poisoning. The Five keys are:
keep clean
separate raw and cooked
cook thoroughly
keep food at safe temperatures
use safe water and raw materials.
